<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE concept PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Concept//EN" "concept.dtd">
<concept id="concept_pd2_rhv_vvb">
    <title>Preface</title>
    <shortdesc/>
    <conbody>
        <p>There is no difficulty in the learned writing for the learned, but it is extremely
            difficult to compose a work for the instruction of the ignorant. The more comprehensive
            and exact knowledge the writer has of his subject the more arduous is the effort to
            express his thoughts in such simplicity as will make it understandable to those who have
            little or no knowledge of the subject he treats. This is doubly so when the subject is
            one like sailing—an art whose language is wholly technical and almost totally divorced
            from the common expressions of life. It is impossible to translate sea language into
            land language; nor is it possible to explain the conditions and operations of the art
            without employing sea terms.</p>

        <p>In this work I have endeavored to avoid as far as is possible the employment of intricate
            or obscure technical language, and where it is used have endeavored to explain the
            meaning and define the application. This book is intended for the use of persons who are
            supposed to be altogether ignorant of the art of sailing. It is a primer and, therefore,
            is almost absurdly simple and profuse in explanatory details. But my experience as a
            teacher has taught me that such books cannot be too simple, and that in order to be
            understandable they must be loaded with explanations of explanations until nothing is
            left to explain. To those who know, this will seem unnecessary, but it must be
            remembered that many who will learn from this book, have not only never handled a
            sailing boat, but have never seen one before, and have but extremely crude notions of
            how the canvas and <term keyref="helm">helm</term> are employed to drive and direct
            them.</p>

        <p>In regard to the glossary: The definitions given are those that define the terms as used
            in sailing or navigating small craft, and may have a different meaning when applied to
            larger vessels. It is very difficult to exactly define many nautical terms, as they are
            words in action, and consequently present different phases, as they are differently
            employed. In many cases only one who is a trained seaman can comprehend their exact
            purport or understand their significant application.</p>
    </conbody>
</concept>
