<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE concept PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Concept//EN" "concept.dtd">
<concept id="reefing_and_jibing">
    <title>Reefing and Jibing</title>
    <shortdesc/>
    <conbody>
        <p>By reefing is meant the means by which a sail is reduced in size by rolling up and tying
                <term keyref="part">part</term> of it down to a spar. The sail that you will have to
                <term keyref="reef">reef</term> is the mainsail, as the jib on a small boat is
            generally too little to be bothered with in that way. You will notice on a sail,
            stretching across it from <term keyref="luff">luff</term> to <term keyref="leach"
                >leach</term>, a band, or sometimes two or three bands, in which are inserted short
            lengths of small line. This is the <term keyref="reef">reef</term> band, and the small
            lengths of rope are called points, or knittles. At either end of the band in the edge of
            the sail you will find a hole—or <term keyref="cringle">cringle</term>, as it is
            called. The hole at the after end in the <term keyref="leach">leach</term> of the sail
            is for the pendant, a small rope that hauls the canvas <term keyref="aft">aft</term> or
            back towards the stern. The hole at the <term keyref="fore">fore</term> end in the <term
                keyref="luff">luff</term> of the sail is for the <term keyref="tack">tack</term>, a
            short length of rope that ties the <term keyref="luff">luff</term> of the sail down to
            the <term keyref="boom">boom</term>.</p>

        <p>There are two ways of reefing. The first and easiest way, which can be performed when the
            boat is at <term keyref="anchor">anchor</term> or <term keyref="lying_to">lying
                to</term> a dock, is to hoist the sail up until the <term keyref="reef">reef</term>
            band is as high as the <term keyref="boom">boom</term>; then take the <term
                keyref="tack">tack</term> and pass the ends round the <term keyref="boom"
                >boom</term>, pass the ends back again through the <term keyref="cringle"
                >cringle</term> several times, if it will go, and then tie hard. Having the <term
                keyref="tack">tack</term> fast, <term keyref="haul">haul</term> out on the pendant,
            which should be rove through a <term keyref="beehole">beehole</term> or cheek block on
            the <term keyref="boom">boom</term>; pull on this until the sail's foot is out <term
                keyref="taut">taut</term>, but do not pull until the cloth is strained. When the
            foot is out <term keyref="taut">taut</term> make the pendant fast; then take a short
            piece of rope and pass it round the <term keyref="boom">boom</term> and pendant just at
            the <term keyref="cringle">cringle</term> and through that hole. Tie this down hard.
            This is called the <i>clew lashing</i>. Always put on a clew lashing, as it will save
            the sail from being torn.</p>

        <p>Having the <term keyref="tack">tack</term> and pendant fast, begin to tie in the points.
            Get all the <term keyref="slack">slack</term> canvas on one side and roll it up tight;
            then pass one end of the <term keyref="reef">reef</term> point through <i>between the
                lacing and the sail, not round the <term keyref="boom">boom</term></i>. Tie the
            point ends together with a <term keyref="bow">bow</term> knot, which is a <term
                keyref="reef">reef</term> knot with the loop caught in the tie. Pull all your points
                <term keyref="taut">taut</term>, but be sure and put the same strain on all. Begin
            to tie in the middle first, and then work toward both ends.</p>

        <p>To shake out a <term keyref="reef">reef</term> reverse these operations. First untie the
            points, then the clew lashing, then <term keyref="slack">slack</term> in the pendant,
            and last cast loose the <term keyref="tack">tack</term> lashing. Be careful to untie all
            the points, because if you do not you are liable to tear the sail when hoisting it.
            Before shaking out a <term keyref="reef">reef</term>, if you have a topping lift fitted
            pull up on that so as to take the weight of the <term keyref="boom">boom</term> off the
            sail. If the air is damp, or rain or spray knocking about, don't <term keyref="haul"
                >haul</term> the sail out very <term keyref="taut">taut</term> or tie the points
            down hard, as the wet will cause the rope and canvas to shrink and strain the sail out
            of shape. Never leave reefs tied in sail when stowed, as the canvas will mildew and
            rot.</p>

        <p><term keyref="jibing">Jibing</term> is the operation of passing a <term keyref="boom"
                >boom</term> sail over from one side of the boat to the other when sailing off the
            wind. A great deal of nonsense has been written and talked about <term keyref="jibing"
                >jibing</term>, and it is commonly supposed to be a very dangerous maneuvre. So it
            is, if carried out by incompetent persons or reckless fools in a bad boat, but if common
            sense and caution are used there is no danger whatever in <term keyref="jibing"
                >jibing</term> a sail at any time.</p>

        <p>The first and most important thing is to keep control of the sheet, and to have as little
            of it out as possible when the sail goes over. In order to do this you must use the
                <term keyref="helm">helm</term> with great care to bring the boat slowly round. If
            it is blowing hard top up the <term keyref="boom">boom</term> and lower the peak; in
            this way you can always safely jibe.</p>

        <p>To jibe: <term keyref="haul">haul</term> in the sheet slowly but steadily, and when well
                <term keyref="aft">aft</term> carefully put the <term keyref="helm">helm</term> up
            until the wind strikes the <term keyref="fore">fore</term> side of the sail. As the
                <term keyref="boom">boom</term> swings across <term keyref="right">right</term> the
                <term keyref="helm">helm</term> and then put it the other <term keyref="way"
                >way</term>, so as to catch the boat as she swings off.</p>

        <p>If you have to jibe all standing—what is called a North River jibe—that is, with the
            sheet all off—just as soon as <term keyref="boom">boom</term> goes over put your helm
            hard the other way; this will throw the boat's head so the wind will strike the <term
                keyref="fore">fore</term> side of the sail and break the force of the swing. It is a
            very dangerous method, unless you are a skillful skipper, and should never be employed
            except in an emergency. Never jibe in a seaway with the sheet off; at such time it is
            better to lower the peak.</p>
    </conbody>
</concept>
