<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE concept PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Concept//EN" "concept.dtd">
<concept id="rules_of_the_road">
    <title>Rules of the Road</title>
    <shortdesc/>
    <conbody>
        <p>The rules of the road are the rules governing the movements of vessels when underway.
            They are laws enacted by an agreement between all maritime nations, and obedience to
            them is compulsory. If in case of a collision, it is proved that one of the parties has
            violated a rule of the road, the damages lie against the violator. Yachtsmen should
            thoroughly learn and understand these rules, and should always maintain and obey
            them.</p>

        <p>A <i>steam vessel</i> is any vessel propelled by machinery—this includes naphtha,
            gasolene, kerosene and electric launches.</p>

        <p>A <i>sailing vessel</i> is a vessel wholly propelled by sails.</p>

        <p>An <i>auxiliary</i> yacht when using her engines, no matter whether she has sail set or
            not is a <i>steam vessel</i>. If not using her engine she is a sailing vessel.</p>

        <p>Steam vessels must keep out of the <term keyref="way">way</term> of sailing vessels;
            sailing vessels must keep out of the <term keyref="way">way</term> of row-boats.</p>

        <p>Vessels of all kinds, when underway, must keep clear of anchored craft or craft lying
            idle or <term keyref="hove_to">hove-to</term>.</p>

        <p>Overtaking vessels must keep clear of vessels overtaken. A sailing vessel overtaking a
            launch must keep clear of the launch.</p>

        <p>When two sailing vessels are approaching one another, so as to involve risk of collision,
            one of them shall keep out of the <term keyref="way">way</term> of the other as
            follows:</p>

        <p>A vessel which is running free shall keep out of the <term keyref="way">way</term> of a
            vessel which is close-hauled.</p>

        <p>A vessel which is close-hauled on the <term keyref="port">port</term>
            <term keyref="tack">tack</term> shall keep out of the <term keyref="way">way</term> of a
            vessel which is close-hauled on the <term keyref="starboard">starboard</term>
            <term keyref="tack">tack</term>.</p>

        <p>When both are running free, with the wind on different sides, the vessel which has the
            wind on the <term keyref="port">port</term> side shall keep out of the <term
                keyref="way">way</term> of the other.</p>

        <p>When both are running free, with the wind on the same side, the vessel which is to the
                <term keyref="windward">windward</term> shall keep out of the <term keyref="way"
                >way</term> of the vessel which is to the <term keyref="leeward">leeward</term>.</p>

        <p>A vessel which has the wind <term keyref="aft">aft</term> shall keep out of the <term
                keyref="way">way</term> of the other vessel.</p>
    </conbody>
</concept>
