<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE concept PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Concept//EN" "concept.dtd">
<concept id="sailing_off_the_wind">
    <title>Sailing Off the Wind</title>
    <shortdesc/>
    <conbody>
        <p>Sailing off the wind, or going free, is a different action from that of sailing on the
            wind. Sailing free is purely a natural movement, complicated by the fact that a vessel,
            owing to her weight obliging her to rest in the water, cannot move as freely as a fabric
            wholly sustained by the air. The fact that friction of the water retards her so that she
            moves at a less speed than the wind that presses her onward permits of her being
            steered. Another complication that effects the speed of a vessel going free is the
            unevenness of the water, the effect of the wind raising surface waves; these greatly
            retard and hamper her movements. If, instead of rising in waves the sea remained smooth
            a sailing vessel could be driven nearly as fast as the wind moves, as is the case with
            ice boats, which on smooth ice move as fast as the wind.</p>

        <p>In sailing to windward the faster a vessel moves the more pressure the wind exerts upon
            her sail. In sailing to <term keyref="leeward">leeward</term> this is just the reverse;
            the faster she goes the less pressure the wind exerts. In the first action she is
            constantly approaching the source of the wind, in the second receding from it. For
            instance, if the wind is blowing at the rate of 20 miles an hour and a vessel sailing
            before it makes 10 miles an hour the pressure in her sails will only be equal to a rate
            of 10 miles. In calculating how much sail to carry the young yachtsman must remember
            this: That a <term keyref="windward">windward</term> breeze is nearly double the wind's
            velocity, that a leeward breeze is equal to the wind's velocity minus the boat's speed;
            so that more sail can be carried off the wind that can be carried on it.</p>

        <p>The amount of sail that can be carried off the wind depends largely upon the form of the
            boat and the height and action of the sea. If the boat is of a good form for running and
            the water smooth you can carry all the sail her spars will stand and she can be steered
            under. But if she is a bad runner, a boat that roots—goes down by the head—or chokes up
            forward, she will do better with less sail. On all boats there is a time when they reach
            their maximum speed running and when they will go along easier and better with less
            canvas. To do her best when running a boat should be kept on an even line—that is, level
            in the water, and not be allowed to shove her head up or drop her stern down.</p>

        <p>In straight stem boats with very little fullness in the forward sections the weight of
            the crew should be kept aft, as they have a tendency to root—shove their bows down—but
            in boats with long, full overhangs the weights should be kept forward, as the shape of
            these craft causes them to shove out the bow and depress and drag the after end.</p>

        <p>The most difficult helming of a boat is off the wind in a tall following sea, and great
            care is necessary then in steering a vessel. If the sea is very heavy and the wind
            strong do not try to run directly before it, but beat to <term keyref="leeward"
                >leeward</term>, first taking the wind on one quarter, and then on the other. If you
            run dead before, be careful not to let the boat sheer off the helm on either side, or
            she will be <i>brought by the lee</i> or <i>broach to</i>. If she is brought by the lee
            her mainsail will jibe over.</p>

        <p>You must watch your boat carefully, and you will soon learn to anticipate her next
            movement, first by noticing the wave that passes, and second by the feeling how she
            lifts on the one just overtaking her. As soon as the stern lifts she will begin to <term
                keyref="yaw">yaw</term>, as it is called, and then you must at once check this
            movement by altering the position of the rudder to prevent her swinging too far. This is
            what is called <i>meeting her with the helm</i>.</p>

        <p>One piece of advice when running before a sea: Never get frightened or rattled, and never
            look behind you, for the sight of a big sea curling up just ready to drop on the stern
            will scare any one but a hardened sea-dog. Always carry enough sail to keep the boat
            racing with the waves, or you are liable to get <term keyref="pooped">pooped</term>. But
            do not carry too much sail, for if you do the boat when on top of a wave if struck, as
            she usually is in such position by a hard puff, is likely to become unmanageable and get
            away from you.</p>

        <p>If you have a boat with a jib, set that and sheet it flat amidships; this when she tries
            to broach to will fill and drive her head off. If she steers hard trim your mainsheet
                <term keyref="aft">aft</term> and it will ease her. Lowering the peak and topping up
            the boom will also ease the steering. Always top up the <term keyref="boom">boom</term>
            if the sea is heavy, so as to prevent the end of the spar striking the water. Never in
            heavy weather square the main <term keyref="boom">boom</term> right off; always keep it
            away from the rigging.</p>

        <p>The light sails commonly employed off the wind are the spinnaker and balloon jib. The
            former is of very little use except with the wind dead <term keyref="aft"
            >aft</term>—that is, directly behind. The moment you have to guy the <term keyref="boom"
                >boom</term> forward to make it draw it loses its power and the balloon jib is a
            better sail to use. Do not have these sails cut too large, as they are then unhandy and
            cannot be kept properly sheeted. Never sheet running sails down hard; give them plenty
            of lift, especially light jibs. A small spinnaker is a great help in steering a boat
            when running before a strong breeze.</p>
    </conbody>
</concept>
