<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE concept PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Concept//EN" "concept.dtd">
<concept id="concept_itw_whv_vvb">
    <title>Special Remarks</title>
    <shortdesc></shortdesc>
    <conbody>
        <p>The first question before you start to learn to sail is: Do you know how to swim? If you
            don't, you have no business in a sailing boat—in fact you have no business on the
            water. No parent should allow his boy or girl to have a sailboat until they have learned
            to swim. It is not difficult to learn to swim; any child can be taught that art in ten
            days, and it should be a compulsory course in all our schools. If people knew how to
            swim, nine-tenths of the drowning accidents that do happen would not. Every summer a
            large number of young people are drowned in this country through the overturning of
            boats or by falling overboard. Had these persons been taught to swim the majority of
            them would not have been drowned. A person who can swim has confidence. If suddenly
            thrown in the water he or she retain their presence of mind, but if unable to swim they
            become panic stricken, and are not only drowned but in their struggles frequently drown
            others.</p>
        
        <p>Another custom prolific of accident on the water is
            the overloading of boats. The green hand should be
            warned against this practice. Never take a lot of people
            out in a boat, particularly a sailboat; especially do not
            take out women and children, or men who are not
            familiar with boats.</p>
        
        <p>Another thing, never play the fool in a boat. A man
            who with others in a boat plays such tricks as rocking
            or trying to carry large sail in a breeze, climbing a
            mast, or any other silly stunt, is a fool, and is not
            fit to be trusted with any sort of a craft.</p>
        
        <p>A properly designed and well-constructed boat is
            perfectly safe in the hands of a sensible person, and
            if properly used be made to give pleasure not only to
            the owner but to others. Sailing is one of the safest
            of our sports; very few yachtsmen lose their lives while
            boating. It is nothing like so dangerous a sport as
            bicycling, automobiling or carriage driving. I have met
            thousands of yachtsmen during my long service in the
            sport, but of all my acquaintances I can only recall one
            who was drowned.</p>
    </conbody>
</concept>
