<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE concept PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Concept//EN" "concept.dtd">
<concept id="taking_care_of_the_boat">
    <title>Taking Care of the Boat</title>
    <shortdesc/>
    <conbody>
        <p>You must not only learn to sail, but you must learn to take care of your boat, to keep
            her neat and clean, and have everything above and below decks in shipshape order.
            Nothing looks worse than a slovenly kept and dirty yacht; a boat with fag ends of rope
            hanging about, loose and tangled messes of gear, sails not properly stowed, and a
            general air of untidiness apparent everywhere. The first attribute of good seamanship is
            order. Therefore, if you want to be considered a skillful sailor, keep your boat both
            above and below decks in shipshape fashion.</p>

        <p>To do this means considerable work. It is no easy job to take proper care of even a small
            yacht, but if you regularly attend to the work you will find it come easier as you grow
            more familiar and used to the task. In the first place, the boat should be kept pumped
            out if she has a leak, as most boats have; next, her decks and cockpit should be
            thoroughly scrubbed and kept as clean as possible; the paint round the house and rails
            washed regularly, and her topsides looked to at least once a week.</p>

        <p>Next, keep good watch over the gear; don't let the ends of the ropes get fagged out; keep
            them whipped. Always, after coming in from a sail, <term keyref="coil">coil</term> down
            and clear up all the ends of the gear. Keep your rodes and warps neatly coiled or
            Flemished, and not heaped in a tangled mass, thrown in any way. Take up on your tackles
            so that ropes don't swing loose, but be careful not to take up too hard, if you are not
            staying on the boat, because if dampness or rain sets in the rope will absorb the
            moisture and swell, causing it to contract and shrink lengthways. This not only is bad
            for the cordage, but in small vessels it frequently strains and distorts the spars.</p>

        <p>If you have to leave your boat for several days with no one to care for her, do not <term
                keyref="stow">stow</term> your sails too tightly; roll them up loosely, and <term
                keyref="gasket">gasket</term> so that they cannot shake out if it comes on to blow.
            If sails are furled in hard rolls the dampness in the canvas will cause them to sweat
            and rot; canvas to keep good wants the air. Sail covers are not good things to use,
            unless they are frequently removed, so as to let the air and sun get at the sails.</p>

        <p>If your boat is rigged with metal <term keyref="blocks">blocks</term>, turnbuckles, etc.,
            these should be frequently oiled and greased, as should also the gooseneck and the jaws
            of the <term keyref="gaff">gaff</term>. By keeping rust and verdigris off the working
            parts of these things you will increase their length of service and always have them in
            good working order. The steering gear, if you use a wheel, should be frequently
            inspected and oiled. If you use a tiller see that it is in good condition and not split
            or weakened where it is attached to the head of the rudder post. Steering gear accidents
            are more frequent than any others, and sometimes lead to disagreeable consequences.</p>

        <p>The chain plates, and the shrouds where they go over the mast should be looked at, and
            also the <term keyref="bobstay">bobstay</term> and other headgear. Make a practice of
            going over your rigging at least once a week during the season, and you will be less
            likely to meet with any mishaps or accidents through something unexpectedly giving
            way.</p>

        <p>Nothing looks better or reflects more credit on a young yacht sailor than to have his
            boat from <term keyref="truck">truck</term> to <term keyref="keel">keel</term> in
            first-class order. It is a certain sign that he understands his business, takes an
            interest in sport, and is a thorough and skilled sailorman. Of course, he cannot if he
            only spends, say, two days out of the week on board keep the boat up to the highest
            notch of completeness and order as a yacht is kept that carries a professional crew, but
            he can keep her neat and clean by giving a few hours of his time to the task. But to
            make the work easy let him refrain from covering his deck with brass or other fancy
            gewgaws. Stick to things that don't need polishing; the less brass the less work.</p>

        <p>Another thing I would point out to you, and that is, when painting the decks or cockpit
            of a boat do not use light-colored paints. One reason for this is that a light color
            shows every speck of dirt and never can be made to look clean, especially if the boat is
            harbored in places where the water is muddy or dirty; the other reason is that light
            paint reflects the sun and is very trying on the eyes. For cockpit, decks and the top of
            cabin houses, use a dark shade of green, grey or slate; green is the best for the
            eyes.</p>
    </conbody>
</concept>
